FilterIt is a tool that helps you parse and filter query strings easily. You can use it on both the front-end and back-end sides of your app.

## How it works ?

You can use any of the following query parameters to filter and sort the results:

- Filters: Specify filter conditions in the format < field | relation_field >=< operator >:< value >. Multiple filters can be chained together using
  the '||' (or) and ',' (and) symbols. Supported operators are:
  - equal, not_equal
  - like, not_like
  - ends_with, starts_with
  - greater_than, greater_than_equal
  - less_than, less_than_equal
  - in, not_in
  - between, not_between
  - is_null, not_null
  - relation filters: FilterIt also supports relationship filters like normal filters. Relationship fields must be connected with the character '\_\_\_'. Some examples are:
    - posts**_tags_**title=equal:filterit
- Sort: Specify the sort order in the format sort_by=< field | relation_field >:< direction >. Multiple sorts can be chained together using the ',' (and)
  symbol. Supported directions are 'asc' and 'desc'.

For example, to retrieve the users whose name contains "John", sorted by name:

`"/api/users?name=like:John&id=not_in:(1`2`3)&sort=name:asc"`

## Front-end Usage

On the front-end side of your app, you can use [filterit-ts](https://github.com/FilterItTool/filterit-ts){:target="\_blank"} to build dynamic query strings that can be used to filter data on the server side. Here's a simple example of usage:

```javascript
const filter = new FilterIt();
filter.Equal('id', 20).OrEqual('id', 22).SortBy('age');

console.log(filter.toString()); // id=equal:20||equal:22&sort=age:desc
```

In this example, we're creating a new FilterIt object and adding some filter and sort criteria to it. The toString() method returns a formatted query string that can be used on the back-end side of your app.

## Back-end Usage

On the back-end side of your app, you can use FilterIt to parse the query string generated by the front-end and use it to filter data in your database. Here's an example of how to use FilterIt in Laravel using [filterit-laravel](https://github.com/FilterItTool/filterit-laravel):

```php
class UserController extends BaseController
{
    public function index(Request $request)
    {
        return User::filterit($request->query())->get();
    }
}

```
